.. _VSV00009:

VSV00009 Varnish Denial of Service Vulnerability
================================================

Date: 2022-08-09

A denial of service attack can be performed against Varnish Cache servers
by specially formatting the reason phrase of the backend response status
line. In order to execute an attack, the attacker would have to be able to
influence the HTTP/1 responses that the Varnish Server receives from its
configured backends. A successful attack would cause the Varnish Server to
assert and automatically restart.

Versions affected
-----------------

* Varnish Cache releases 7.0.0, 7.0.1, 7.0.2, 7.1.0

Versions not affected
---------------------

* Varnish Cache 7.0.3 (released 2022-08-09)

* Varnish Cache 7.1.1 (released 2022-08-09)

* All versions of Varnish Cache 6.0 LTS series and Varnish Cache Plus by
  Varnish Software.

* GitHub Varnish Cache master branch at commit <insert-commit-sha-here>

Mitigation
----------

If upgrading Varnish is not possible, it is possible to mitigate the
problem by adding the following snippet at the beginning of the
`vcl_backend_response` VCL function::

  sub vcl_backend_response {
	set beresp.status = beresp.status;
  }

By setting the status code to itself as described above, the reason field
will automatically be reset to the standard value for the given status
code, or "Unknown HTTP Status" if no standard value exists for that
code. This would overwrite any existing attack content in the reason
field.

Credits
-------

This problem was first identified and reproduced by Anthony Schwartz. The
original test case and maintainer notification was made by Guillaume
Quintard.
