.. _VSV00017:

VSV00017 Varnish HTTP/2 Made You Reset Attack
=============================================

`CVE-2025-8671 <https://www.cve.org/CVERecord?id=CVE-2025-8671>`_
`VU#767506 <https://kb.cert.org/vuls/id/767506>`_

Date: 2025-08-13

A denial of service attack can be performed on Varnish Cache servers that
have the HTTP/2 protocol turned on. An attacker can create a large number
of streams and immediately reset them without ever reaching the maximum
number of concurrent streams allowed for the session, causing the Varnish
server to consume unnecessary resources processing requests for which the
response will not be delivered.

This attack is a variant of the HTTP/2 Rapid Reset Attack, which was
handled as :ref:`VSV00013 <VSV00013>`. The countermeasure put in place for
:ref:`VSV00013 <VSV00013>` was to implement a rate limit on the number of
stream resets allowed before the session would be closed by the Varnish
server. The new variant of the attack bypasses this rate limit by
executing a benign protocol violation, causing the stream to be reset by
the server rather than by the client. This would effectively bypass the
rate limit, reopening the attack vector.

The Made You Reset Attack was disclosed on August 13 2025.

Note: When this issue was first patched, the releases unfortunately
contained an HTTP/2 regression bug (4380_). This affected the 7.6.4, 7.7.2
and 6.0.15 releases. This bug has been fixed in the 7.6.5, 7.7.3 and
6.0.16 releases.

.. _4380: https://github.com/varnishcache/varnish-cache/issues/4380

Versions affected
-----------------

* Varnish Cache releases 5.x, 6.x, 7.0.x, 7.1.x, 7.2.x, 7.3.x, 7.4.x,
  7.5.x, 7.6.0, 7.6.1, 7.6.2, 7.6.3, 7.7.0, 7.7.1

* Varnish Cache 6.0 LTS series up to and including 6.0.14.

* Varnish Enterprise by Varnish Software 6.0.x up to and including 6.0.14r4.

Versions not affected, but has regression
-----------------------------------------

* Varnish Cache 7.6.4 (released 2025-08-13)

* Varnish Cache 7.7.2 (released 2025-08-13)

* Varnish Cache 6.0 LTS version 6.0.15 (released 2025-08-13)

Versions not affected
---------------------

* Varnish Cache 7.6.5 (released 2025-08-20)

* Varnish Cache 7.7.3 (released 2025-08-20)

* Varnish Cache 6.0 LTS version 6.0.16 (released 2025-08-20)

* GitHub Varnish Cache master branch at commit b82fd1eee320af32f16997e7e755f8f983ba42c8

* Varnish Enterprise by Varnish Software version 6.0.14r5.

Mitigation
----------

If upgrading Varnish is not possible, it is possible to mitigate the
problem by simply disabling HTTP/2 support::

    varnishadm param.set feature -http2

You must also remove ``h2`` from the list of protocols if your TLS
terminator is advertising it with ALPN.

The attack is also partly mitigated by the second line of defense that was
put in place when the similar :ref:`VSV00013 <VSV00013>` Rapid Reset
Attack was patched. A circuit breaker before the execution of VCL
subroutines was put in place to fail the transaction if the client reset
its stream. This mechanism is controlled by a feature flag
``vcl_req_reset`` that defaults to on. With this mechanism in place,
Varnish servers are much more resilient to this type of attack.

Monitoring the mitigations
--------------------------

The monitoring strategies described in :ref:`VSV00013 <VSV00013>` are also
applicable to this issue.


Thankyous and credits
---------------------

Thanks to the reporters, Gal Bar Nahum, Anat Bremler-Barr, and Yaniv Harel
of Tel Aviv University.
