.. _VSV00005:

VSV00005 Varnish HTTP Proxy Protocol V2 Denial of Service
=========================================================

Date: 2020-02-04

An assert can be triggered in Varnish Cache when using Varnish with a TLS
termination proxy, and the proxy and Varnish use the PROXY version 2
protocol to communicate connection details. Depending on the type of proxy
used and the details it include in the proxy payload, it may be possible
for remote clients to cause Varnish to assert and restart, making it a
denial of service attack.

The assert will cause Varnish to restart, and the cache will be empty
after the restart. This will reduce overall performance due to an
increased number of cache misses, and may cause higher load on the backend
servers.

There is no potential for remote code execution or data leaks related to
this vulnerability.

Mitigation is possible by configuration tuning, or by updating to a fixed
version of Varnish Cache.


Versions affected
-----------------

* Varnish Cache releases 6.0.0, 6.0.1, 6.0.2, 6.0.3, 6.0.4, 6.0.5, 6.1.0,
  6.1.1, 6.2.0, 6.2.1, 6.2.2, 6.3.0, 6.3.1.
* 6.0 LTS by Varnish Software up to and including 6.0.5


Fixed in
--------

* Varnish Cache 6.2.3
* Varnish Cache 6.3.2
* 6.0.6 LTS by Varnish Software
* GitHub Varnish Cache master branch at commit <XXX-Insert-SHA-value-here>


Mitigation
----------

It is possible to mitigate the problem in several ways.

Switch to proxy protocol version 1
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Setups using proxy protocol version 1 are not affected, so if the TLS
termination proxy used supports both versions, switching to version 1 will
mitigate the problem. This is the recommended mitigation method.

Note that version 1 of the proxy protocol will communicate less details
about the connection than what is possible when using version 2. For
example the SNI server name used by the connecting client will not be
transferred, and can then not be queried using the Proxy VMOD in VCL.

When using the Hitch TLS proxy, version 1 of the proxy protocol can be
selected by replacing any ``write-proxy`` or ``write-proxy-v2`` options
with ``write-proxy-v1``, and restarting Hitch.


Disallow non-matching SNI names in Hitch
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

When using Hitch as the TLS termination proxy, one can work around the
problem by disallowing client connects connecting using a SNI servername
that does not match any of the configured certificates. This can be done
by adding the ``sni-nomatch-abort`` option to the Hitch configuration.

Please not that this mitigation strategy is only effective if none of the
configured certificates allow wildcard domain names.

Increase the session workspace
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

By increasing the session workspace, one can make sure that an attacker
can not successfully exhaust the space available, thus not triggering the
assert. The size it needs to be set at depends on the TLS proxy in use,
and what fields it include in the proxy payload and how a remote client
can influence its contents.

By default the session workspace is set to 512 bytes. The session
workspace can be changed by setting the ``workspace_session`` Varnish
parameter, and restarting the Varnish daemon.

When using Hitch as the TLS proxy, setting the session workspace to 34k
will mitigate the problem completely. Add "-p workspace_session=34k" to
the `varnishd` command line to set this value.

Note that increasing the session workspace will increase the amount of
memory Varnish holds per connection, and you may want to decrease the
memory cache size to compensate.

Thankyous and credits
---------------------

Varnish Software for handling this security incident.
